---
title: "BSc project- Phased array simulations for all-optical diagnostic ultrasound"
excerpt: "Photoacoustic simulations"
header:
  image: files/portfolio/chamber.png
  teaser: files/portfolio/bsc_chamber.png
sidebar:
  - title: "Role"
    image: https://pxl-imperialacuk.terminalfour.net/fit-in/448x293/prod01/channel_2/media/migration/staff/Blue-on-white--tojpeg_1495792235526_x4.jpg
    image_alt: "Imperial College London logo"
    text: "Student researcher"
    
  - title: "Timeframe"
  - text: "Jan-Apr 2022"
  
  - title: "Supervisor"
    text: "[Dr Chris Rowlands](https://profiles.imperial.ac.uk/c.rowlands) at Imperial College London"
  - title: "Responsibilities"
    text: "Driving and delivering the project, along with project partner Yuji Go."

---

## Our Imperial Bsc project

Having developed an interest in interdisciplinary research, I did a project with with Bioengineering department. This is a computational-based project scoping out the ability to generate arbitrary wavefronts using an all-optical ultrasound transducer.

### Motivation

### What is diagnostic all-optical ultrasound?

There is potential for all-optical ultrasound to make whole-body imaging more affordable, safer and have higher resolution. We present results from computer simulations done with the k-Wave toolkit to study the phased-array performance for an all-optical ultrasound system. This proposed implementation uses the superposition of signals from four electro- optic modulator and spatial light modulator pairs to generate a pulsed acoustic wave via the thermoelastic effect. The phased-array effect is limited because time delays are limited to within 1 period of the central acoustic pulse frequency.

## What we did

I studied the mathematics of ultrasound and subsequently set up the physics simulation in MATLAB to study the beam shape.

To determine whether these phased-wrapped waves could still be used for imaging, the resolution was investigated by measuring beam widths and insonifying three phantoms in 2D using steered and focused waves.

An image can be generated by measuring the reflected waves using the same simulated transducer. I collected this data and analysed the images quantitatively using various metrics.

## Skills developed

**Physics**: understanding of ultrasound concepts (A-scan, B-scan), bandwidth, signal quality metrics (signal to noise ratio, contrast ratio).

**Simulation**: Learnt the [k-Wave](http://www.k-wave.org/) software in MATLAB.

**Software**: ImageJ for image analysis.

## Related work

Glenn A. Howe, Meng-Xing Tang, and Christopher J. Rowlands, "Tailored photoacoustic apertures with superimposed optical holograms," [Biomed. Opt. Express 14](https://opg.optica.org/boe/fulltext.cfm?uri=boe-14-12-6361&id=542535), 6361-6380 (2023)