---
title: "Applications Engineering at Living Optics"
excerpt: "My work at a cool imaging startup"
header:
  # image: files/portfolio/livingoptics_logo.jpg
  teaser: files/portfolio/lo.png

sidebar:
  - title: "Role"
    image: files/portfolio/livingoptics_logo.jpg
    image_alt: "Imperial College London logo"
    text: "Field Applications Engineer"
  - title: "Timeframe"
  - text: "Aug 2023 - Now"

---

As of the time of writing, [Living Optics](https://www.livingoptics.com/) is an early stage startup aiming democratise spectral imaging by manufacturing a low-cost, easy-to-use hyperpsectral camera for computer vision developers.

## What does a field applications engineer do?

As an applications engineer, I use my training in physics and computer vision to explore new ways developers can use our camera. I directly train and support our customers and run research projects to develop new applications.

## Highlights

Some highlights of my time include

- Developing a multithreaded PyQt Graphical User interface to showcase applications for demoing at SPIE Photonics West 2024, the largest photonics conference in the world
- Contributing to a [whitepaper](https://www.spiedigitallibrary.org/conference-proceedings-of-spie/12879/3001623/A-video-rate-hyperspectral-camera-for-monitoring-plant-health-and/10.1117/12.3001623.short) published as a conference paper at SPIE
- Developed machine learning algorithms using OpenCV, Scikit-learn and Pytorch for hyperspectral anomaly detection, image segmentation, sensor fusion and structure from motion
- Representing the company to attend [London Imaging Meeting 2024](https://www.imaging.org/IST/IST/Conferences/LIM/LIM2024/Home.aspx) and presenting my work on hyperspectral point clouds
- Presenting our technology to large companies in calls and in person demonstrations

Apart from the technical skills gained by learning on the job (CUDA installations especially XD), I'd like to point out the diffuse knowledge I gained by working in a small startup.

During my time here, I have learnt

- As the company has a flat structure, I was only 2 levels away from the top of the organisation. I gained a sense of how different parts of the business such as R&D, product, applications, business development etc. work together to push the company forward
- The unseen work (legal, documentation, manufacturing) that goes into product development
- How to collaborate and write maintainable code via version control and good coding practices (command line interfaces, modularity etc.)
- How start-up fundraising works
- Learning how to foam milk using the coffee machine :)

More to come!